To protect the wellbeing of its staff and stakeholders, the South African Council for the Project and Construction Management Professions (SACPCMP) has put a number of measures in place to ensure that the risk of Covid-19 transmission is managed throughout its office premises.  Since the COVID-19 outbreak was declared a global pandemic and a National State of Disaster in South Africa, strict measures have been introduced by the South African Government to protect people from contracting this virus.  The SACPCMP has aligned its actions to such measures to safeguard its stakeholders. “The health and safety of our employees, Registered Persons, applicants and other visitors to our offices is paramount,” said SACPCMP Registrar, Mr. Butcher Matutle.   “As such, we have ensured that communication on precautionary measures regarding the new Corona Virus is well displayed throughout our Council premises.  We have also placed hand and surface sanitiser throughout the offices, and at all entry points, to ensure that high levels of hygiene and cleanliness are maintained at all times.” To further reduce any possibilities of spreading the virus, Matutle has appealed to the public to refrain from visiting the Council’s offices in Midrand. “While we have put stringent measures in place to ensure that the environment is as secure as possible from the risk of transmission, we request that the public avoid visiting the premises during the next three to four weeks as an added measure of precaution.  This offers better chance at ensuring that our staff avoid infection thereby allowing us to better serve our stakeholders without disruption,” he said. The Council has also encouraged social distancing and advised stakeholders of the following points to minimise the transmission of the virus: Hygiene Practices Further details regarding office access/availability will be posted on the SACPCMP’s web and social media platforms over the forthcoming weeks.  Stakeholders are encouraged to not visit the SACPCMP offices but rather phone or email-contact the Council.