Health and safety are key drivers for Concor Buildings at the construction of Oxford Parks Phase I which is due for completion in stages during 2020.  This project comprises the construction of four mixed-use premium office and retail buildings, and a fifth building which will house a hotel. Accommodating the workforce and all subcontractors required for the simultaneous construction of the various structures, means that there can be no compromise on health and safety. Godfrey Baloyi, Concor Buildings HSE practitioner on site, explains that Concor’s internal health and safety policies are applied in line with those of ComPrac Holdings who has been appointed health and safety compliance consultant. As part of the stringent safety requirements, Baloyi audits and ensures that the safety files of all subcontractors are aligned with those of Concor Buildings. All site staff undergo an initial safety induction before they can commence their duties, and issues of concern are addressed at weekly toolbox talks. Daily planning and safety meetings confirm the priority given to health and safety on site. Safety is enforced through a policy of Visible Felt Leadership (VFL). The implementation of this policy is a two-way approach. When a potential health or safety infringement or a life-threatening situation is observed, activity is stopped immediately, and corrective coaching is given. Major incident prevention (MIP) is the second approach. To this end, foremen and section leaders are required to check that the site is safe, while the contract manager ensures that all documentation relating to competence and certification are in place in terms of the OSH Act. Bennie de Koker, Concor Buildings HSE Manager, says that in the past safety on site was the responsibility of safety officers only. “Today, safety is fortunately no longer seen in isolation, but as a collaborative effort on the part of everyone on site. Continuous coaching and awareness campaigns are critical.” A new innovative concept has been introduced on this site by Concor Buildings. “Understanding the impact of visuals, workers are shown a picture and are asked to identify unsafe or potentially hazardous practices and to suggest corrective action,” De Koker says. “This method of interactive discussion is proving to have great impact when used in conjunction with traditional safety instructions.” De Koker and Baloyi jointly have more than 30 years of experience and both are registered Construction Health and Safety Professionals with The South African Council for the Project and Construction Management Professions (SACPCMP), attesting to Concor’s commitment to observing safe practices.